Restructuring of the basis module (#23)
flatironinstitute/generalized-linear-models: docs/developers_notes/basis_module.md

# The Basis Module

The `neurostatslib.basis` module provides objects that allow users to construct and evaluate basis functions of various types. The classes are hierarchically organized as follows:

```
Abstract Class Basis
|
├─ Abstract Subclass AdditiveBasis
│

> ├─ Abstract Subclass MultiplicativeBasis

Author: Makes sense

│
├─ Abstract Subclass SplineBasis
│   │
│   └─ Subclass MSplineBasis
│
├─ Abstract Subclass RaisedCosineBasis
│   │
│   ├─ Subclass RaisedCosineBasisLinear
│   │
│   └─ Subclass RaisedCosineBasisLog
│
└─ Class OrthExponentialBasis
```

> We've used abstract classes to ensure that any basis object inheriting from the superclass will implement the abstract methods of the superclass. This guarantees that if the inputs and outputs of those methods conform to the requirements specified by the abstract superclass, any new basis class implementation will integrate seamlessly with the basis objects already implemented in the library.

Reviewer: Or I guess they'll interact with them via `+` and `*`, but still

> We've used abstract classes to ensure that any basis object inheriting from the superclass will implement the abstract methods of the superclass. This guarantees that if the inputs and outputs of those methods conform to the requirements specified by the abstract superclass, any new basis class implementation will integrate seamlessly with the basis objects already implemented in the library.

Author: the + * interaction is what I meant, but I see your point

The user only needs to instantiate the non-abstract subclasses located at the bottom of the hierarchy. These classes provide two public methods, `evaluate` and `evaluate_on_grid`, both of which are defined in the superclass `Basis`. These methods perform checks on both the input provided by the user and the output of the evaluation to ensure correctness, and are thus considered "safe."

Additionally, a user can combine multiple objects that are subclasses of Basis, creating a higher-dimensional basis set object. Basis objects can be combined using the `__add__` and `__mul__` methods, which allow for the following syntax:

```
basis_add = basis_a + basis_b # calls basis_a.__add__(basis_b)

basis_add = basis_a * basis_b # calls basis_b.__mul_(basis_b)
```

## The Class `neurostatslib.basis.Basis`

> 

Reviewer: and that we want developers to call `super().__init__()` in all subclasses (specifying the arguments they should pass as well)

### The Public Method `evaluate`

The `evaluate` method checks input consistency and evaluates the basis function at some sample points. It accepts one or more numpy arrays as input, which represent the sample points at which the basis will be evaluated, and performs the following steps:

1. Checks that the inputs all have the same sample size `N`, and raises a `ValueError` if this is not the case.
2. Checks that the number of inputs matches what the basis being evaluated expects (e.g., one input for a 1-D basis, N inputs for an N-D basis, or the sum of N 1-D bases), and raises a `ValueError` if this is not the case.

> 3. Checks that the output of the method does not exceed `gb_limit` GB of memory size. This size limit is specified at class initialization.

Author: it is approximate the size of an array of size N as  (N x size of the array elements).
for example, for the size of an array of 1000 numpy.int64, you would get 8000 bytes instead if you generate the array and you call sys.getsizeof(array) you would get 8112 bytes on my machine
(112 bytes is the size of the instantiated empty array that you would get with sys.getsizeof(np.array([],dtype=np.int64))).

The key is the approximation is accurate enough given that the overlay of the numpy & jax array is very small

> 3. Checks that the output of the method does not exceed `gb_limit` GB of memory size. This size limit is specified at class initialization.

Reviewer: Gotcha, that makes sense (and I think is worth describing somewhere, in docs or docstring).

But in general, like I think I've mentioned, I'm uncomfortable with this 3rd step. I don't think I'm aware of another scientific python package that implements this check? I.e., you can easily create a torch tensor, numpy array, or xarray that's too big for memory, and I'm assuming there's a good reason for that. My guess is that this step could cause it to break in weird ways, and it's not really doing what the user wants --- they'd want to make sure *their whole analysis pipeline* (or at least the GLM portion that's written in our package) doesn't exceed memory (rather than just the basis matrix), but there's no way we can guarantee that. 

Ultimately, it's up to you, but I think we should take the fact that this doesn't exist in other scientific packages, despite being easy to approximate and relevant, as a strong warning sign (happy to be proven wrong if this is somewhere!)

4. Calls the `_evaluate` method on the input, which is the subclass-specific implementation of the basis set evaluation.

> 5. Returns a numpy array of dimension `N x number of bases`, with each basis element evaluated at the samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Returns a numpy array of shape `(N, n_basis_funcs)`, with each basis element evaluated at the samples.
```

two changes: use numpy shape convention (clearer than x), and change to `n_basis_funcs`, which is an argument we accept. 

Feels a bit weird to mix "mathy" (`N`) and "computer-sciencey" (`n_basis_funcs`) conventions, I'd vote for being consistently computer-sciencey, except in equations.

This method performs the following steps:

1. Checks that the number of inputs matches what the basis being evaluated expects (e.g., one input for a 1-D basis, N inputs for an N-D basis, or the sum of N 1-D bases), and raises a `ValueError` if this is not the case.
2. Checks that the output of the method does not exceed `gb_limit` GB of memory size. This size limit is specified at class initialization.
3. Calls the subclass-specific `_get_samples` method, which returns equidistant samples over the domain of the basis function. The domain may depend on the type of basis.
4. Calls the subclass-specific `_evaluate` method.
5. Returns both the sample grid points and the evaluation output at each grid point.

### Abstract Methods

The `neurostatslib.basis.Basis` class has the following abstract methods, which every non-abstract subclass must implement:

1. `_evaluate`: Evaluates a basis over some specified samples.
2. `_get_samples`: Returns a tuple of equidistant samples (as flat numpy arrays) for each dimension of the basis function. These samples are used to form a grid over which the basis is evaluated.

> 3. `_check_n_basis_min`: Checks the minimum number of basis functions required. This requirement can be specific to the type of basis.

Reviewer: Looks like for many of the subclasses, this just checks that the value is positive. Is it worth implementing this in the superclass and telling developers they can overwrite it themselves?

## The `AdditiveBasis` Class

> This class extends the abstract `Basis` class and represents a set of basis functions that are combined additively. It overrides the `_evaluate`, `_get_samples`, and `_check_n_basis_min` methods with specific implementations for additive basis functions.

Reviewer: needs a longer description of what it means to combine bases additively or a link to an example

### Overridden Methods

1. `_evaluate`: For an `AdditiveBasis` object, this method should evaluate each basis function at the specified samples and then add the results together.
2. `_get_samples`: This method should return equidistant samples over the domain of each basis function. The samples should then be summed together.
3. `_check_n_basis_min`: This method checks whether the number of basis functions meets the minimum requirement for an additive basis set.

## The `MultiplicativeBasis` Class

> This class extends the `Basis` abstract class and represents a set of basis functions that are combined multiplicatively. It overrides the `_evaluate`, `_get_samples`, and `_check_n_basis_min` methods with specific implementations for multiplicative basis functions.

Reviewer: needs a longer description of what it means to combine bases multiplicatively or a link to an example

### Overridden Methods

1. `_evaluate`: For a `MultiplicativeBasis` object, this method should evaluate each basis function at the specified samples and then multiply the results together.
2. `_get_samples`: This method should return equidistant samples over the domain of each basis function. The samples should then be multiplied together.
3. `_check_n_basis_min`: This method checks whether the number of basis functions meets the minimum requirement for a multiplicative basis set.

## The `SplineBasis` and `MSplineBasis` Classes

> The `SplineBasis` class is an abstract subclass of `Basis` that represents a spline basis function. The `MSplineBasis` class is a concrete subclass of `SplineBasis` that implements a specific type of spline basis, the M-spline.

Reviewer: needs a longer description or a link to what a "spline basis function" means. and what's shared among spline bases that makes it worth having their own subclass.

> ### Overridden Methods for `MSplineBasis`

Reviewer: does SplineBasis do anything? should be described

1. `_evaluate`: For an `MSplineBasis` object, this method should evaluate the M-spline at the specified samples.
2. `_get_samples`: This method should return equidistant samples over the domain of the M-spline.
3. `_check_n_basis_min`: This method checks whether the number of M-spline basis functions meets the minimum requirement.

## The `RaisedCosineBasis`, `RaisedCosineBasisLinear`, and `RaisedCosineBasisLog` Classes

> The `RaisedCosineBasis` class is an abstract subclass of `Basis` that represents a raised cosine basis function. The `RaisedCosineBasisLinear` and `RaisedCosineBasisLog` classes are concrete subclasses of `RaisedCosineBasis` that implement specific types of raised cosine basis functions.

Reviewer: needs a longer description or a link to what a "raised cosine basis function" means (with reference, I think). Also, what's shared among them that makes it worth having their own subclass, and how they differ.

E.g., "The two concrete subclasses have the same `_evaluate` function but differ in their `_get_samples` method"

### Overridden Methods for `RaisedCosineBasisLinear` and `RaisedCosineBasisLog`

1. `_evaluate`: For these objects, this method should evaluate the raised cosine function (with either linear or logarithmic spacing) at the specified samples.
2. `_get_samples`: This method should return equidistant samples over the domain of the raised cosine function.
3. `_check_n_basis_min`: This method checks whether the number of raised cosine basis functions meets the minimum requirement.

## The `OrthExponentialBasis` Class

> The `OrthExponentialBasis` class extends the `Basis` abstract class and represents an orthogonal exponential basis set. It overrides the `_evaluate`, `_get_samples`, and `_check_n_basis_min` methods with specific implementations for orthogonal exponential basis functions.

Reviewer: needs a longer description or a link to what a "orthogonal exponential basis set" means.

Author: can you help me with this? 

I understand what is happening mechanistically with this basis, it is a basis of decaying exponential with different decaying rates that gets passed through a numerical orthonormalization (something like using Gram–Schmidt method). I am less sure of when could be useful and specific applications of it

Reviewer: We should talk with @ahwillia about this, I believe he came up with this basis set.

### Overridden Methods

1. `_evaluate`: For an `OrthExponentialBasis` object, this method should evaluate each basis function at the specified samples and then combine them orthogonally.
2. `_get_samples`: This method should return equidistant samples over the domain of each basis function. The samples are then combined orthogonally.
3. `_check_n_basis_min`: This method checks whether the number of basis functions meets the minimum requirement for an orthogonal exponential basis set.

## Developer Guidelines

Developers are welcome focus on either develop non-abstract classes for new basis function types
as we as add additional checks at evaluation, as well as improve the documentation and readability
of the code. What we won't advise is to alter the abstract-classes structure, which may affect
the overall module and how each of the objects interacts with each other.

Feel free however to work on any piece of code you fell you can improve. More importantly, remember
to thoroughly test all your classes and functions, and provide clear, detailed comments in your code. 

> This will not only help others use your library, but also facilitate future maintenance and development.

Reviewer: These lines are generic and belong in the intro note

1. Checks that the number of inputs matches what the basis being evaluated expects (e.g., one input for a 1-D basis, N inputs for an N-D basis, or the sum of N 1-D bases), and raises a `ValueError` if this is not the case.
2. Calls the subclass-specific `_get_samples` method, which returns equidistant samples over the domain of the basis function. The domain may depend on the type of basis.
3. Calls the `evaluate` method.
4. Returns both the sample grid points of shape `(m1, ..., mN)`, and the evaluation output at each grid point of shape `(n_basis_funcs, m1, ..., mN)`, where `mi` is the number of sample points for the i-th axis of the grid.

### Abstract Methods

The `neurostatslib.basis.Basis` class has the following abstract methods, which every concrete subclass must implement:

1. `_evaluate`: Evaluates a basis over some specified samples.
2. `_check_n_basis_min`: Checks the minimum number of basis functions required. This requirement can be specific to the type of basis.

## Contributors Guidelines

### Implementing Concrete Basis Objects
To write a usable (i.e., concrete, non-abstract) basis object, you

- **Must** inherit the abstract superclass `Basis`

> - **Must** define the `_evaluate` and `_check_n_basis_min` methods with the expected input/output format, see [Code References](../../reference/neurostatslib/basis/) for the specifics.

Author: I'll add a note. it would be easier for a basis to linearly map [0,1] to any finite interval so that one doesn't have to re-implement _get_samples, but requiring this seems too much
